---
title: 'Influential Movement Scientists: IV. Charles Scott Sherrington (1857 - 1952)'
date: 2016-12-15
permalink: /posts/2015/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - physiologists
  - movement scientists
  - reflexes
  - teachers
---

Rini Varghese

A true teacher at heart, Charles S. Sherrington hosted numerous students in his laboratory, many of whom are part of the my Influential Movement Scientists Series. He conducted some of the most fundamental research on reflexes. Reflections on one of his more comprehensive works cited below:
Sherrington, C. S. (1906). Integrated action of the nervous system. Rontledge, New York, 308-353.
 
 Sherrington’s was one of the earlier works to refute the Eastern ideas of conditioned reflexes by I.P. Pavlov. Sherrington’s experiments provided a distinct resolution to our view of movement organization by examining the reflex, which he called a functional unit of integrated movement. With an inside-out approach, his level of analysis was different from Woodworth’s analysis of movement accuracy, but as we will see in the next section, a unique confluence of the work of these two scientists is seen in the ideas forwarded by Bernstein.
 
The importance of the synapse
Sherrington emphasizes the functional significance of the ‘surfaces of separation’ between nerve cells in the coordination of reflexes. This surface of separation, or synapse, is thought to be the site where the neuron’s overall activity is modulated, and is thought to play an important role in synaptic plasticity. Through its specialized chemical properties of a synapse, such as the ability to accumulate charge and form double electric layers, that the conduction of a reflex arc is discriminated from that of nerve trunks.
 
Neural principles governing coordinated movement
With regards to integrated action, Sherrington puts forth eleven salient features of reflex arc conduction, primarily at the site of the synapse, and one at the site of the receptor. Of these, the most important ones that have implications for movement coordination, and provide neural basis for concepts proposed later by Bernstein are: selective excitability, non- linear summation, and inhibition. Selective excitability refers to the property of the reflex arc at the site of the receptor that allows it to be excitable by only a certain kind of stimulus, and no other. This specialized property acts as a form of filter through which only a specific type of sensory information is allowed in a given reflex arc, thereby only eliciting the response that is specific to that incoming stimulus. A selectively excitable reflex arc upon repeated excitation and response elicitation might lower the threshold for future responses. Sherrington also refers to this property as being concerned with the ‘mode of excitation’ of the reflex arc, rather than specifics of its conduction. The receptor can, therefore, be thought of as the site where the reflex gain is modulated. The properties of non-linear summation and inhibition operate at the site of the synapse. Non-linear summation refers to the combination of multiple stimuli, where no one stimuli are weighted equally, and all are required in order to elicit a response. This property allows for a reflex arc to have variable thresholds, depending upon the accumulation of charge at the site of the synapse, and thus accounts for the level of excitability. Finally, inhibition refers to the property of the reflex arc that suppresses response to signals other than those that potentiate the ongoing action. This property thus acts as in- built resistance mechanism. Unlike passive inhibition, where synaptic charge dissipates over time, reciprocal inhibition of reflex arcs is active, not only preventing current flow but also actively suppressing it in any directions that are not conducive to the action at hand.
Taken together, a network of reflex arcs each comprising of afferent neurons that are selectively responsive to certain types of stimuli that are non-linearly summated, and efferent neurons that deliver a scaled output make for a fairly complex structural and functional basis for highly coordinated and regulated movement later described by Bernstein.

